The pathogen may be present for a short time on infected seed and in soil, but these are not considered important inoculum sources.
With yellow leaf, the bacteria are not present in the leaf itself but can be found in the internodes and crowns of affected stems.
Total crop failure is not uncommon with kresek.
The disease causes blight on seedlings, which are grown from heavily infected seeds, and can cause 10-58% seedling mortality.
The disease was considered to be the major factor contributing to the “Great Bengal Famine” in 1942 resulting to yield losses of 50% to 90% and caused the death of 2 million people.
Under Guyana conditions reduction in yield can be as high as 45% in severe infection and 12% in moderate infection.
Use resistant/tolerant cultivars in cases where the soil amendment does not work to correct the problem.
The fungus can survive on seeds for up to 4 years Seed treatment with captan, thiram, chitosan, carbendazim, or mancozeb has been found to reduce seedling infection.
Since the fungus is seed transmitted, a hot water seed treatment (53-54°C) for 10-12 minutes may also be effective before sowing.
Spores land on leaves, germinate, penetrate the leaf, and cause a lesion 4 days later; more spores are produced in as little as 6 days.
The conidia present on infected grain and mycelium in the infected tissue are viable for 2 to 3 years.
The fungus over winters and survives for long periods as sclerotia in the upper layers (2-3 inches) of the soil profile.
The half-life of sclerotia in the field is about 2 years.
Viable sclerotia have been found in fields for up to 6 years after a rice crop.
The fungus survives as chlamydospores for one or more years under normal condition and 3 years in stored grains.
Seedlings in the nursery show circular, yellow spots in the margin that enlarge, coalesce leading to drying of foliage. “Kresek” (wilt) symptom is seen in seedlings, 1-2 weeks after transplanting.
The symptoms first appear on young leaves, 1-2 weeks after transmission of the virus as yellow and then turn yellow to orange-yellow in another two weeks.
The insect can acquire the virus from the source plants in 5 minutes and then immediately can transmit it into healthy plants in 5 minutes.
Tungro symptom appears 1-2 weeks after virus transmission.
In case of above problems (toxicity), almost 100% plants of the affected field may show yellowing from the very beginning.
Disease spreads by the brown plant hopper, Nilaparvata lugens, in a persistent manner having a latent period of 5 to 28 days in the vector.
Ten to 100% yield losses may be incurred depending on the category of symptom production on panicle.
Thor ufra' can cause 100% yield loss.
In general, an average of 4-8% yield loss is attributed due to ufra by reducing plant population and panicle number, and poor grain filling.
More than 70% relative humidity, 28-31°C temperature, free moisture on host tissue, and Zn deficient soil favor ufra disease of rice.
Cultural practices: Drying soil, ploughing land for 5-6 times at 1-12 days intervals, and during stubble reduce nematode population in the field.
Application of chemicals in two splits, one at transplanting and the other at 6-8 week after transplanting increases the effectiveness of the treatment.
Nematicides may be applied in seedbed 7 days before seedling uprooting for control.
Infected hills do not recover but they die before maturity of the crop.
If current income and consumption growth trends continue, FAO estimates that agricultural production will have to increase by 60 percent by 2050 to satisfy the expected demands for food and feed.
CSA brings together practices, policies and institutions that are not necessarily new but are used in the context of climatic changes, which are unfamiliar to farmers, herders and fishers.
Achieving this involves improving farm-level productivity, processing practices, and overall rice competitiveness (Denning and Baroang, 2013).
Broken kernels Whose lengths are at least 2.5 parts of a whole kernel, but less than the length of head rice.
Dry paddy rice Paddy rice with the moisture of less than 15 percent for trade rice.
Flowering date or blooming date The day that not less than 80 percent of rice plants in the field are blooming.
Hard rice Broken kernel whose length is more than those of brokens but does not reach the length of the whole kernel.
Wet paddy rice Paddy, which is harvested and immediately threshed without exposing to moisture reducing process.
Normally the moisture of this paddy is not less than 18 percent by weight.
Whole kernels Rice kernels that are in whole condition without any broken parts, including kernels which have at least nine parts.
Regarding direct seeded rice (DSR) technology, about 49 percent monsoon rice and 78 percent summer rice are DSR in Myanmar.
A system of rice intensification (SRI) is simply introduced as improved techniques, though general farmers are not yet adaptive to it due to intensive crop management and limited capacity of rice farmers.
Domestication of wild rice(s) probably started about 9 000 years ago.
The spikelets are without awns, with easily shattering grains, having 23 to 31 percent amylose content.
Nutritional, medicinal and industrial uses of rice Rice (Oryza sativa L.) is of vital importance in human nutrition and is eaten as a staple food by 75 percent of the world population.
Rice is grown on 155 million ha, accounting for 1/5th of the global calorie supply.
Around 900 million of the world’s poor1 depend on rice as producers or as consumers.
Among the agricultural crops, rice plays an essential role not only in food security but also in the nation’s economic development.
Nearly 70 percent of the population rely directly or indirectly on the rice industry.
Rice is thus inextricably interwoven into the economic and social fabric of Myanmar (Win, 1990).
The crop has a life cycle ranging from 105 to 145 days, depending on biotic and abiotic factors.
Rice seed, seedling emergency and seedling growth: Rice grains having dormancy do not germinate until conducive temperature is provided.
The primary roots called seminal roots are not branched and disappear after germination, while the secondary adventitious roots are produced from the underground nodes of the young culm and are profusely branched.
The crop was cultivated at an area of 7 149 000 ha, with a total production of 28 016 000 tonnes and yield of 3.92 kg ha-1.
The farmers are less trained in implementation of IPM2 approaches, which can significantly reduce their cost of production and increase rice yield.
Fertilizers and organic manures are usually applied to the seedling nurseries but application after transplantation is not appropriately taken care of.
Diseases and insect pest: Rice yield and quality can be significantly reduced if appropriate control and prevention of insect pests are not taken.
Some farmers use pesticides/insecticides but are not properly aware of quality, method and time of recommended agrochemicals.
Due to low quality and less improved processing facilities, Myanmar is getting only 30 percent of the export price of rice received as compared to other ASEAN countries.
Rice requires a high temperature between 20 and 40°C.
The optimum temperature of 30 °C during daytime and 20 °C during nighttime seems to be more favorable for the development and growth of rice crop (Mitin, 2009).
A temperature lower than 10 ℃ is not suitable for seedling growth.
However, the crop normally requires 800 to 1 200 mm of water with extremes between 520 and 2 550 mm during the growing season.
The crop daily water requirements range from six to 10 mm.
Photoperiod Rice is sensitive to photoperiod and its yield is influenced by solar radiation, especially during 35 to 45 days before maturity.
Bright sunshine with low temperature during the ripening period of the crop helps in the development of carbohydrates in the grains, resulting in improved seed density and quality (Mitin, 2009).
The optimum soil pH for rice growing is 5.5–7.0 (Myanmar GAP guidelines, 2018).
The practice is based on precise techniques of meeting optimum rice nutrientla and water requirements (Thiyagarajan and Gujja, 2012).
The optimum soil pH for rice growing ranges from 5.5 to 7.0 (Myanmar GAP Guidelines, 2018).
Primary tillage can be done through animal or tractor drawn implements, such as disc plow, moldboard plows, tined or rotavators up to a depth of 100 to 150 mm.
Varietal purity tests include looking for percentage of (1) germination, (2) other mixed in varieties, (3) weed seeds and other crop seeds, (4) inert material (stones, soil, etc.), (5) red rice seeds, and (6) moisture content.
Head rice recovery is expressed as a percentage of the total milled rice that may vary from as low as 25 percent to as high as 65 percent (IRRI Rice Knowledge Bank).
Dried seeds should be placed in a bag for 24 hours, in a shady area, with good air circulation.
The temperature during drying should not increase than 420C, as increased temperature may damage the seeds.
The roots should not exceed five mm at the time of sowing, either through broadcast or drum seeding.
Seed rate and method of sowing Levelling of rice fields could reduce the seed rate if there are no rats, birds or weed problems.
Seedling age at transplant is important for the desired crop stand and plays an important role in tillering capacity of the plants per hill. (Ginigaddara and Ranamukhaarachchi, 2011, p.
The age of the seedlings at the time of transplanting should be 20 to 25 days using two to three plants per hill at 1.5 inches of seedling depth.
Skip one row/six rows for seed production and one row/10 rows for grain production.
The age of seedling at transplanting and number of plants per hill are important to get the proper plant population density. (Myanmar GAP Guidelines, 2018).
A seed rate of 30 to 50 kg for transplanting to one ha of land is sown in the properly puddled and leveled bed.
One meter wide and with a convenient length, soil is raised five to 10 cm above the field level.
Depending on the soil and local climate, normally 15 to 21 days old seedlings are transplanted to the main field.
A nursery of 15 to 21 days old is transplanted into the field.
A 100-meter square field is prepared.
A seed rate of 40 to 50 kg is sown for an area of one ha.
The seed is cultivated at one kg 1.5 m-2.
The seedlings are transplanted after nine to 14 days to the main field.
Seedlings should be transplanted before 25 days after sowing as transplanting of old seedlings may result in low yield.
Macronutrients (4 R nutrient stewardship for rice) Nitrogen Nitrogen management in rice has a challenging aspect in terms of applying the right rate and type of fertilizer to achieve maximum yield.
Some other research experiments have revealed that rice yield and yield characteristic positively responded to nitrogen application at 120 kg ha-1.
About 63 kg ha-1 (56 lbs acre-1) of compound fertilizer or three tonnes of natural fertilizer (compost of cow-dung) is applied as a basal application.
About 63 kg ha-1 (56 lbs acre-1) of urea and six bags ha-1 of compost should be mixed and applied at sowing time (Myanmar GAP guidelines, 2018).
Splitting of nitrogen can be increased in coarse textured sandy soils under flooded/irrigation systems or high rainfall areas as well as when the crop is of longer duration (Thiyagarajan and Gujja 2012).
With urea deep placement (UDP) technology, rice yield can be improved by at least 18 percent in the wet season and 28 percent in the dry season compared with broadcasting urea at the same N rate.
The remaining one third at tillering and another one third at stem elongation period should be deep placed, preferably at five to 10cm depth in the soil to reduce N losses (Aye, 2014).
Phosphorus is mobile within the plant, but not in the soil.
Phosphorus fertilizers should be fully incorporated into the soil during puddling or top dressing of the entire dose at 10 to 15 days after direct seeding.
Application of 60 to 90 kg P2O5 ha-1 was found beneficial for higher rice yield.
If all the straws are removed from the field, 15 kg ha-1 P2O5 should be applied in the field (Aye, 2014).
In case of potassium deficiency, water use, and nitrogen efficiency is also greatly reduced (Mikkelsen and Roberts, 2021).
Bacterial blight of rice or bacterial leaf blight of rice.
Inoculum: Inoculum can be present in rice stubble and weed hosts.
The bacterium spreads by irrigation water, rain, plant-to-plant contact, and tools used for transplanting seedlings.
Typhoons are associated with rapid spread of the disease.
When there is sufficient bacterial multiplication, some bacteria invade the vascular system and may ooze from hydathodes.
There are two main sets of disease symptoms, leaf blight and wilt; the latter is commonly referred to as kresek.
Leaf blight, the more common symptom, generally occurs from the maximum tillering stage onward.
Drops of bacterial ooze may be observed on young lesions.
They may coalesce to cover the entire leaf blade.
Infected plants produce fewer and lighter grains, and the grain is of poor quality.
A third, less common symptom associated with bacterial blight is called “yellow leaf” or “pale yellow”.
The youngest leaf of the plant becomes uniformly pale yellow or has a broad chlorotic stripe.
It occurs in the tropics from the seedling to early tillering stages.
The leaves then turn yellow to straw-colored and wither, and the entire plant generally dies.
Weeds, rice stubble, and ratoons (shoots arising from base of plants) of infected plants sustain survival of the pathogen.
The disease is effectively controlled with resistant cultivars.
Seed treatment has been practiced using bleaching powder and zinc sulfate.
Xanthomonas oryzae pathovars on rice: Cause of bacterial blight and bacterial leaf streak.
Gradation in symptom development (top to bottom) on leaves with water-soaked streaks that widen, lengthen, and turn yellow.
Leaves with grayish white lesions with wavy margins.
Leaf with elongated gray lesion, typical of blight disease.
Leaf with grayish white lesion on right caused by Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzicola and water-soaked streaks with bacterial ooze on left caused by X. oryzae pv. oryzae.
Rice with white leaves and dead seedlings, kresek stage of disease.
Provide well balanced nutrients for the soil.
Clean all rice debris and weeds from fields which sources of inoculum.
Initial symptoms are noticed on leaf sheaths near water level.
On the leaf sheath oval or elliptical or irregular greenish grey spots are formed.
Lesions on the upper parts of plants extend rapidly coalescing with each other to cover entire tillers from the water line to the flag leaf.
The presence of several large lesions on a leaf sheath usually causes death of the whole leaf, and in severe cases all the leaves of a plant may be blighted.
The infection extends to the inner sheaths resulting in death of the entire plant.
Plants heavily infected in the early heading and grain filling growth stages produce poorly filled grain, especially in the lower part of the panicle.
Mycelium and conidia in the infected straw and seeds are major sources of inoculum.
Irrigation water may carry the conidia to different fields.
The fungus also survives on collateral hosts.
Primary infections generally result in a few widely scattered spots on leaves.
Secondary spread is responsible for the severe epidemics of blast in fields and localized areas.
Brown spot Causal organism: Bipolaris oryzae (Sexual stage: Cochliobolus miyabeanus) Symptoms: The fungus attacks the crop from seedling to milky stage in main field.
Several spots coalesce and the leaf dries up.
Dark brown or black spots also appear on glumes leading to grain discoloration.
It causes failure of seed germination, seedling mortality and reduces the grain quality and weight.
Airborne conidia infect the plants both in nursery and in main field.
The brown spot fungus is normally present in areas with a long history of rice culture.
Airborne spores that are capable of causing infection are produced in infested debris and older lesions.
Narrow brown leaf spot Causal organism: Cercospora oryzae Symptoms: Short, linear brown lesions are produced on the leaves but may also occur on the leaf sheaths, pedicels and glumes.
The flag leaf sheath show oblong or irregular greyish brown spots.
They enlarge and develop grey center and brown margins covering major portions of the leaf sheath.
The panicles rot and abundant whitish powdery fungal growth is seen inside the leaf sheath.
Secondary spread is by means of air borne conidia produced on the leaf sheath.
The sclerotia are buoyant and float to the surface of floodwater where they contact, germinate, and infect rice tillers near the water line.
Usually only a few spots on a few leaves are observed in the field.
Grains infected by the fungus show pale brown to whitish spots with a dark brown boarder of relatively large size.
As spores or mycelium in the seed and infected host tissues.
False smut Causal organism: Ustilaginoidea virens Symptoms: Infected grains are transformed into greenish spore balls of a velvety appearance.
Two types of infection are observed.
One type at flowering stage when the ovary is destroyed but the style, stigma and anther remains intact and covered by the spore mass.
Second type occurs when the grain is matured.
Spore accumulation on the grain absorb moisture, swell and force the lemma and palea apart.
Grasses and wild rice species are alternate hosts.
Ascospores produced from sclerotia act as primary source of infection while chalmydospores are secondary source of infection.
The grains may be partially or entirely replaced by the fungal spores.
Bacterial leaf blight Causal organism: Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae Symptoms The disease is usually noticed at the time of heading but it can occur earlier also.
The bacteria enter through the cut wounds in the leaf tips, become systemic and cause death of entire seedling.
In grown up plants water soaked, translucent lesions appear near the leaf margin.
The lesions enlarge both in length and width with a wavy margin and turn straw yellow within a few days, covering the entire leaf.
As the disease advances, the lesions cover the entire lamina which turns white or straw coloured.
Milky or opaque dew drops containing bacterial masses are formed on young lesions in the early morning.
The affected grains have discoloured spots.
If the cut end of leaf is dipped in water, it becomes turbid because of bacterial ooze.
The pathogen survives in soil and in the infected stubbles and on collateral hosts.
The pathogen spreads through irrigation water and also through rain storms.
Tungro Causal organism: Rice tungro spherical virus (RTSV) and ii) Rice tungro bacilliform virus (RTBV).
Stunting of plant is due to shortening of both leaf and sheath; yellowing may range from light yellow to orange/orange-red.
Bronzing or rusty spots/lesion may also appear on leaf.
Discoloration of leaves from yellow to orange or orange-red (may occur).
Irregular spots like bronzing may appear on the leaves of infected seedlings/plants.
In some varieties, the leaf angle becomes wider and the texture of the leaf becomes stiff.
But in case of tungro, the infection pattern initially show sporadic or in patchy and gradually may cover entire plot or part of the plot.
Grassy stunt Causal organism: Rice grassy stunt virus Symptoms Plants are markedly stunted with excessive tillering and an erect growth habit.
Leaves become narrow, pale green with small rusty spots.
May produce a few small panicles which bear dark brown unfilled grains.
Ratoon crop and presence of vector perpetuate the disease from one crop to other.
It survives in the off season forming coil on infested dried stubble, panicles or grains left on the field at harvest and or in living state on ratoon, volunteer rice and weed hosts.
Raising seedling in disease free land, Crop rotation with jute/pulse or oil seeds was found effective to reduce ufra.
Zn application also reduces ufra infestation.
Traditional rice cultivar Rayada, Karkati, Bazail, Gowai etc were found resistant to ufra.
Agriculture must therefore transform itself if it is to feed a growing global population and provide the basis for economic growth and poverty reduction.
Climate change will make this task more difficult under a business-as-usual scenario, due to adverse impacts on agriculture, requiring spiralling adaptation and related costs.
To achieve food security and agricultural development goals, adaptation to climate change and lower emission intensities per output will be necessary.
Climate change is already having an impact on agriculture and food security as a result of increased prevalence of extreme events and increased unpredictability of weather patterns.
Developing countries and smallholder farmers and pastoralists in particular are being especially hard hit by these changes.
More productive and more resilient agriculture requires a major shift in the way land, water, soil nutrients and genetic resources are managed to ensure that these resources are used more efficiently.
By reducing greenhouse gas emissions per unit of land and/or agricultural product and increasing carbon sinks, these changes will contribute significantly to the mitigation of climate change.
It is composed of three main pillars: sustainably increasing agricultural productivity and incomes; adapting and building resilience to climate change; reducing and/or removing greenhouse gases emissions, where possible.
CSA is an approach to developing the technical, policy and investment conditions to achieve sustainable agricultural development for food security under climate change.
The magnitude, immediacy and broad scope of the effects of climate change on agricultural systems create a compelling need to ensure comprehensive integration of these effects into national agricultural planning, investments and programs.
The CSA approach is designed to identify and operationalize sustainable agricultural development within the explicit parameters of climate change.
In carrying out this work, the Organization provides guidance about the practices, technologies, policies and financing that are required to achieve a productive, resilient and sustainable agriculture sector.
This approach also aims to strengthen livelihoods and food security, especially of smallholders, by improving the management and use of natural resources and adopting appropriate methods and technologies for the production, processing and marketing of agricultural goods.
CSA seeks to support countries in putting in place the necessary policy, technical and financial means to mainstream climate change considerations into agricultural sectors and provide a basis for operationalizing sustainable agricultural development under changing conditions.
Innovative financing mechanisms that link and blend climate and agricultural finance from public and private sectors are a key means for implementation, as are the integration and coordination of relevant policy instruments and institutional arrangements.